Juvenile crime is not on the rise in Baltimore overall, but
a perceived crisis in the city contributed to a state law
that passed this year, rolling back some of the provisions
of a more progressive law passed just two years before. In
passing the law, which took effect Nov. 1, Maryland joined
a growing list of states to pass tougher juvenile crime
laws in recent years. Several states have passed or are
considering bills that require children to be charged as
adults for serious offenses. In Baltimore, youth account
for just 5% of arrests by the Baltimore Police Department
this year, according to BPD data analyzed by the Sentencing
Project a decrease from 10% in 2016. Carjackings, which are
commonly blamed on young people, are more frequent than
they were before the pandemic, but they’re trending
downward after a spike in 2023. Juvenile crime as a whole
with some exceptions appears to be trending down.
Nationwide, arrests and detention of juveniles declined by
about 75% from 2000 to 2022. Still, the juvenile justice
system takes a disproportionate toll on Black children.
Maryland prosecutes children as adults more frequently than
almost any other state, and the majority about 80% of
children in adult court are Black, experts say. In the
upcoming session, lawmakers are expected to consider
legislation that would reduce the number of crimes for
which minors are automatically charged as adults, giving
juvenile court judges the discretion to keep kids out of
the adult system. Andre Davis, a former federal appellate
judge and Baltimore City solicitor, is now chairing a new
juvenile justice reform commission, which has met twice
since last month. The committee is in the
information-gathering stage, but is required to issue
policy recommendations. RELATED: As MD legislators prepare
gun-related bills, Trump administration looms Davis said
the state needs “significant reform in the way that we
respond to antisocial conduct by young people,” but that
the problem isn’t as severe as many believe it to be. “I
think there’s a real difference between perception and
reality,” Davis told The Daily Record. “I think that the
problem of so-called ‘juvenile crime’ is not nearly the
crisis that some of the reporting in the media would
suggest. That’s my perspective. ” What the data show
Another recent report by The Sentencing Project blames
local news media for the perception of a juvenile crime
crisis in Baltimore. The nonprofit research and advocacy
group, which opposes mass incarceration and racial
disparities in the criminal justice system, studied crime
coverage by four local TV stations, The Baltimore Banner
and The Baltimore Sun in the first half of 2024. RELATED:
MD child care advocates seek to sustain funding, support
expanded pre-K It found that, to varying degrees, “they
have been providing their audiences with skewed and
misleading information about youth crime. ” By far, Fox45,
Sinclair Broadcast Group’s flagship station, published the
most stories about juvenile crime, and used more of what
the report deemed “sensationalized” or “fear-inducing
rhetoric” than the other outlets. “Many media outlets are
mischaracterizing isolated short-term increases from
artificially low offending rates during the pandemic as a
major new teen crime wave,” the report states. In
Baltimore, youth arrests have been declining in recent
months after an increase from early 2021 to the end of
2023. BPD arrested 51 minors in July 2024, and a monthly
average of 65 minors this year. By comparison, Baltimore
police arrested an average of 198 minors per month in 2017
and 134 per month in 2019. [box type="shadow"
class="alignleft" width="300px" ]MORE FROM THE AUTHOR:
[feed url="" number="3" ][/box] Only 5% of people one in 20
people arrested by BPD this year have been under 18, below
the national average by a few percentage points. Youth have
accounted for no more than 9% of BPD arrests since 2017,
when they made up 12%. But more than half of Fox45’s crime
stories, according to The Sentencing Project, focused on
crimes committed by youth. The city saw 300-400 carjackings
a crime often attributed to minors, although incident
reports do not identify the offenders each month from 2018
through 2022. That number spiked to more than 1,600
carjackings in mid-2023, an increase that saw frequent
media coverage. Monthly carjackings have since decreased to
about 55o per month significantly above pre-pandemic
levels, but a third of last year’s high. Nationally,
despite the general decrease in crime, more young people
used guns and committed homicides in 2022 as compared to
2016, according to the Council on Criminal Justice. The
rates of burglary, larceny and robbery all decreased.
RELATED: MD legislators face transportation challenges in
2025 Vincent Schiraldi, secretary of the Maryland
Department of Juvenile Services, said homicides committed
by youth are down this year according to last year,
Maryland Matters reported. DJS did not respond to a request
for an interview with Schiraldi. State Del. Luke
Clippinger, D-Baltimore City and chairman of the House
Judiciary Committee, who sponsored the bill that took
effect last month, did not follow up on requests for
comment. Details of the new law HB814, the law that took
effect Nov. 1, allowed children as young as 1o to be
referred to juvenile court for “specified crimes involving
weapons, firearms, cruelty to animals, sexual offenses, and
motor vehicle theft,” according to an analysis by the
legislature. A 2022 law had prohibited children younger
than 13 from being criminally charged except for certain
violent offenses. Among other provisions, the law also
expands probationary periods. The law also created a
commission, chaired by Davis, that will study best
practices to hold people accountable while preventing
trauma and racial disparities. Maryland Public Defender
Natasha Dartigue has been one of the law’s most vocal
opponents, describing it in a press release as a “crime
bill that dismantles the protections established by the
2022 Juvenile Justice Reform Act, disregards best practices
for addressing delinquent behavior, and fails to look at
long term impact. ” While BPD is arresting fewer children
in Baltimore, more are being charged as adults; the vast
majority are Black. RELATED: MD public defender pushing for
substantial staff boost as state faces budget deficit
According to WYPR, Sen. Will Smith, D-Montgomery and
chairman of the Senate Judicial Proceedings Committee, who
sponsored the new juvenile justice law, wants to pass a
bill that would decrease the number of crimes for which
children are automatically sent to adult court. The idea
has been proposed several times in recent years. Davis said
he recently learned that juvenile court judges very rarely
disagree when DJS officials determine a minor should be
detained a fact that hit him “like a ton of bricks. ” “If
you make a mistake and detain a kid who really shouldn’t be
detained, that is really corrosive of the system,” he said.
Michael Pinard, a professor at the University of Maryland
School of Law, runs a legal clinic through which law
students represent kids who are facing expulsion,
suspension or other discipline at school, with the goal of
keeping them out of the juvenile and criminal justice
systems. When students are disciplined at school, they’re
more likely to become involved in the criminal justice
system, he said. Pinard said his work gives him a “bird’s
eye view of the trajectory between school discipline,
criminalization and long-term incarceration,” particularly
for Black people. “This is a state that really, truly,
hyper-criminalizes its Black citizens,” Pinard said. “It is
very easy to be suspended or expelled from school,” he
said. “They are owed the opportunity to put this situation
in context. . . I think that the systems aren’t necessarily
designed to do that. ” Copyright © 2024 BridgeTower Media.
All Rights Reserved. Classification
